# USNews
A visual analytical tool which simulates UGA ranking based on quantitative and qualitative measures that education experts have proposed as a reliable indicator of academic quality, it is based on research views of what matters in education.

The college experience cannot be measured by a series of data points. But for families concerned with finding the best academic value for their money, USNews Best College Ranking provide an excellent starting point for the search. They help you compare at a glance the relative quality of institutions based on such widely accepted indicators of excellence as first-year retention rates, graduation rates and the strength of the faculty.
The USNews ranking system rests upon two pillars. The formula uses quantitative and qualitative measures that education experts have proposed as reliable indicators of academic quality, and it is based on research view of what matters in education. First, school are categorized by their mission, which is derived from the breakdown of types of higher education institutions originally developed by Carnegie Foundation for the advancement of Teaching. The categories are National Universities, National Liberal Arts Colleges, Regional Universities and Regional Colleges. However, how schools are grouped relies on the Carnegie principles. The National Universities offer a full range of undergraduate majors plus master’s and Ph.D. programs and emphasize faculty research. National Liberal Arts colleges focus almost exclusively on undergraduate education; they awarded at least 50 percent of their degrees in the arts and sciences.  The Regional Universities offer a broad scope of undergraduate degrees and some master’s degree programs but few, if any, doctoral programs. The Regional Colleges focus on undergraduate education but grant fewer than 50 percent of their degrees in liberal arts disciplines, it also includes schools that have small bachelor’s degree program but primarily grant two year associate degrees. The Regional Universities and Regional Colleges are further divided and ranked in four geographical groups North, South, Midwest and West.

Purpose
The indicator we use to capture academic quality fall into a number of groupings: assessment by administrators at peer institutions, how well schools retain and graduate students, the quality of and investment in their faculty, admissions selectivity, financial resources, and alumni giving. The indicators include input measures that reflects school’s student bodies, faculties and resources. It also include outcome measures that signal how well institutions are engaging and educating their students. An explanation of the measures and their weightings in the ranking formula can be found at usnews.com/collegemeth. 
Table 1-US News Inputs Groups
Input Groups	Weight
Retention	22.5 %
Assessment by peers and counselors	22.5 %
Faculty resources	20 %
Student selectivity	12.5 %
Financial resources	10 %
Graduation rate performance	7.5 %
Alumni giving rate	5 %

Retention: The Higher the proportion of first year student who returned to campus for sophomore year and eventually graduate, the better a school most likely is at offering the classes and services that students need to succeed. This measure has two components: six year graduation rate ( 80 percent of the retention score ) and first year retention rate ( 20 percent ). The graduation rate indicates the average proportion of class earning degree in six years or less. We consider freshman classes that started from fall 2006 through fall 2009. First year student retention indicates the average proportion of freshmen who entered the school in the fall of 2011 through fall 2014 and returned the following fall.
Assessment by peers and counselors: The ranking formula integrates the opinions of those in a position to judge a school’s undergraduate academic excellence. The academic peer assessment survey allows presidents, provosts and deans of admission to account for qualitative measures of peer institutions such as faculty dedication to teaching. The average academic peer score are derived from using the two most recent sets of survey results, collected in spring 2015 and spring 2016. Using two years of data incorporates a larger number of respondent and reduces year to year volatility in the results. The views on the national universities and the national liberal arts colleges, they surveyed 2,200 counselors at public high schools that appeared in recent USNews Ranking of best high schools. In the case of the national universities and national liberal arts colleges, the academic peer assessment account for 15 percent points of the weighting and 7.5 percentage points goes to the counselor’s rating. Once again, three most recent year’s results were combined to compute the average high school counselor score. In term of reputation, peers only judge the regional universities and the regional colleges. 
Faculty resources: Research shows that the more satisfied students are about their contact with professors, the more they will learn and the more the more likely they are to graduate. There are five factors from 2015 – 2016 academic year to assess a school’s commitment to instruction. Class size  ( 40 percent of this measure ) is a more nuanced factor than in the past. There are index created that takes fuller advantages of the data school report on class size. School receive the most credit in this index for their proportion of undergraduate classes with fewer than 20 student. Classes with 20 – 29 student score second highest, those with 30 – 39 student got third highest and fourth highest goes to class size of student 40 – 49. Classes that have 50 or more student receive no credit. Faculty salary ( 35 percent ) is the average faculty pay, plus benefits, during the 2014 – 2015 and 2015 – 2016 academic years, adjusted for regional differences in the cost of living using indexes from the consulting firm Runzheimer International. Weight the proportion of professors with the highest degree in their field ( 15 percent ), the student – faculty ratio ( 5 percent ), and the proportion of faculty who are full time ( 5 percent ).
Student selectivity: A school’s academic atmosphere is determined in part by the abilities and ambitions of the students. USNews factors innthe admissions test scores for all enrollees who took the critical reading and math portions of the SAT and the composite ACT score ( 65 percent of the selectivity score ). The proportion of enrolled freshmen at national universities and national liberal arts colleges who graduated in the top 10 percent of their high school classes or in the top quarter at regional universities and regional colleges ( 25 percent ). The acceptance rate or the ratio of the students admitted to applicants ( 10 percent ). The data are all for the fall 2015 entering class. While the ranking calculation takes account of both SAT and ACT scores of all entering students. 
Financial resources: Generous per student spending indicates that a college can offer a wide variety of programs and services. USNews measures financial resources by using the average spending per student on instruction, research, student services and related educational expenditure in the 2014 and 2015 fiscal years. Spending on sports, dorms and hospitals does not count.
Graduation rate performance: This shows the effect of program and policies on the graduation rate when controlling for spending per student, admissions selectivity, and the proportion of the undergraduates receiving Pell grants. School’s six year graduation rate for the class that entered in 2009 relative to the graduation rate predicted for the class based on regression analysis. If the actual graduation rate is higher than the predicted rate, then the college is enhancing achievement.
Alumni giving rate: This reflects the average percentage of living alumni with bachelor’s degree who gave to their school during 2013 – 2014  and 2014 – 2015 an indirect measure of student satisfaction.
The purpose of this study is to understand how US News inputs can be modeled over time and across postsecondary educational institutions in order to make actionable decisions with these inputs, potentially indirectly affecting overall rankings by improving student success.  In Table 1 below, the inputs that are used to rank order institutions in a given year are provided.  It is important to note that US News methodology will convert each of these institutional inputs into a standardized variable with zero mean and standard deviation of unity.  For more information on the US News methodology see ( www.usnews.com/collegemeth ).
Table 2-US News Inputs and Descriptions
Input	Description	Weight
EDUC EXP STUDENT	Education Expenditure / Student	10 %
GRAD 6YR AVG	Average Graduation Rate (6-year)	18 %
RETENT AVG FR	Average Retention Rate (Fall-Spring)	4.5 %
PEER ASSESS SCORE	Peer Assessment Score	15 %
PCT CLASSES LT 20	Percentage of Classes Less Than 20	8 %
STU FAC RATIO	Student-Faculty Ratio	1 %
FAC COMP RANK	Faculty Compensation (Rank)	7 %
PCT FAC PHD	Percentage Faculty with Highest Degree in Field	3 %
PCT FT FAC	Percentage Full-Time Faculty	1 %
STAND TEST SCORE 25	Entering Standardized Test Score (SAT / ACT) 25th Percentile	4.0625 %
STAND TEST SCORE 75	Entering Standardized Test Score (SAT / ACT) 75th Percentile 	4.0625 %
ACCEPT RATE	Acceptance Rate	1.25 %
GRAD DIFF	Graduation Rate Difference (Actual - US News Predicted)	7.5 %
ALUMNI RANK	Alumni Giving (Rank)	5 %
PCT FT TOP QTR	Percentage Entering Freshmen in Upper 25th Percentile (HS)	3.125 %
HS COUNSELOR SCORE	High-School Counselor Score	7.5 %

Method
Let r_it denote the US News ranking of institution i at time (year) t for years covering 2004-2016.  The first step was to determine a statistical model that could predict rank r_it using the inputs above.  The most basic model is to assume that r ~ MVN(Xβ,Σ), or that rank will follow a multivariate normal distribution with mean vector β and input (predictor) and covariance matrix X and Σ respectively.  SAS® PROC MIXED was used to fit a repeated measures model to estimate β and Σ via maximum likelihood (MLE) to determine the solution vector β ̂ and estimated covariance matrix Σ ̂ for the MLEs.  An intercept was included in the model, along with the lag-one rank for institution i and the 16 different US News inputs-note that the dimensionality of β ̂ is 18 x 1 and 18 x 18 for Σ ̂.  

Simulation
Once β ̂ and Σ ̂ were obtained by SAS® PROC MIXED we wanted to estimate the impact of manipulating inputs on future rankings by simulating the uncertainty of the association between these inputs and overall rank (I think this a good point to emphasize, that you generated draws from these parameters to help provide a credible interval).  For the purpose of this project we are just considering the inputs for the University of Georgia (UGA) in a given year t.  Since MLEs are multivariate normal under large sample sizes, we initially attempted to draw n = 50,000 replications from a multivariate normal distribution with mean vector β ̂ and estimated covariance matrix Σ ̂.  The JavaScript j.stat package has a multivariate normal call.  However, this proved to be time consuming.  To speed up the simulation we considered a Cholesky decomposition of the covariance matrix Σ ̂.  This was achieved by the following steps:
	Find the Cholesky root matrix for Σ ̂ such that Σ ̂=LL^T where L is a lower triangular matrix.  This matrix was obtained from SAS® PROC IML using the root function.
	Begin loop{n=1 to 50,000}
Simulate an 18 x 1 vector z of standard normal random variables-JavaScript has a j.stat package to simulate standard normal random variables.
Calculate y=β ̂+ Lz
Store
End Loop
	Concatenate each draw from step 2 to create a 18 x n matrix of correlated draws that should have expectation β ̂ and covariance matrix Σ ̂.
	Determine the standardized coefficients for UGA in a given year t, call this vector c ̂ which is of dimension 18 x 1.
	Find the estimated rank by calculating r ̂=c^T y.
The vector r ̂ is 1 x n.  Plot the values.  The result should be a univariate normal distribution.  If one wants to determine the impact of inputs on the estimated rank, one would need to modify the values in step number 4 above.  For instance, one could determine the impact of moving one-standardized unit in a given direction for a particular input.  Plot these against the default draws in step number 5 to determine the impact (positive or negative).  This approach was considered ideal because it allowed the user to set inputs in a standardized scale and to simulate uncertainty for forecasting future ranks. 
*L is a lower triangular matrix
